# Spring Boot autoconfiguration

In this lesson, we'll understand the Spring Boot autoconfiguration mechanism.

The relevant module for this lesson is: [boot-auto-configuration-end](../code/learn-spring-m2/spring-boot-auto-configuration-end)

## Boot autoconfiguration

**Spring Boot simplifies development with a core, versatile mechanism called autoconfiguration.** This is based on a number of aspects, such as properties, beans and [classpath](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classpath_(Java)) dependencies.

What’s powerful about this mechanism is that it intelligently backs off when we add our own configuration.

Like many other things in Spring, the mechanism is driven by annotations.

**Boot relies on the _@Conditional_ annotation and on a number of variations to drive autoconfiguration:**

-   _@ConditionalOnClass,_
-   _@ConditionalOnMissingClass,_
-   _@ConditionalOnBean,_
-   _@ConditionalOnMissingBean_

These annotations allow us to define configuration based on runtime conditions.

Let's have a look at an example of an autoconfiguration, the _JacksonAutoConfiguration_ class:

```
@Configuration
@ConditionalOnClass(ObjectMapper.class)
public class JacksonAutoConfiguration {
    
    // ...
}
```

Notice this is a standard _@Configuration_ class with an extra annotation: _@ConditionalOnClass_ . As the name suggests, this will only be enabled if the _ObjectMapper_ class is on the classpath.

So, simply put, if Jackson isn’t on the classpath of our project, this entire configuration class will do nothing.

The Jackson library is brought in by the standard Boot web starter in our application.

Let’s add a breakpoint in the _jacksonObjectMapper_ and debug the application. We'll see that this breakpoint fires, which means the autoconfiguration is loaded.

## Overriding the autoconfiguration

Notice that some of the beans, like the _ObjectMapper_ here, have one more annotation: _@ConditionalOnMissingBean_

This is a critical aspect of Boot autoconfiguration, the backing-off we talked about earlier.

Simply put, **if we add our own _ObjectMapper,_ then this bean definition will become disabled and our own bean will take priority**.

Let’s define our own _ObjectMapper_ bean and verify that, once we do, this default bean will no longer be created by Spring:

```
@Configuration
public class AppConfig {

    @Bean
    public ObjectMapper objectMapper() {
        return new ObjectMapper();
    }

}
```

If we add a breakpoint in this method and debug the application, we can see our bean is now created and the previous breakpoint no longer fires.

Therefore, the Boot autoconfiguration has intelligently backed off.

## Logging autoconfiguration Information

We can also check the auto-config info that’s enabled at startup.

**Let’s configure the DEBUG log level for the_boot.autoconfigure_package:**

```
logging.level.org.springframework.boot.autoconfigure=DEBUG
```

The autoconfiguration logging report will contain information on:

- _Positive matches_ - autoconfigurations that are enabled as their condition was matched
- _Negative matches_ - autoconfiguration classes with conditions evaluated to false, which remain disabled
- _Exclusions_ - classes we exclude
- _Unconditional classes_ - configurations without conditions

If we search for the _jacksonObjectMapper_ bean from the _JacksonAutoConfiguration_ class in the report, we'll see this was not created, as the _ConditionalOnMissingBean_ condition was false.

This report is very useful to understand the configuration enabled in a Spring Boot project and troubleshoot any configuration issues.

## The _@EnableAutoConfiguration_ Annotation

As the name suggests,**the _@EnableAutoConfiguration_ annotation is used to enable autoconfiguration in a Spring Boot application** which automatically applies autoconfiguration beans if they are found on the classpath.

It also allows excluding certain autoconfiguration classes using the _exclude_ property.

Previously we saw that _@SpringBootApplication_ also does the same so what is the difference between these two annotations?

Basically, _@SpringBootApplication_ is a combination of the annotations _@EnableAutoConfiguration_ , _@ComponentScan_ and _@Configuration_ thus it simplifies development by reducing the number of annotations needed to bootstrap the context.

You should only choose and add one of these two annotations to your primary _@Configuration_ class.

## Resources
- [Spring Boot autoconfiguration](https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/reference/html/using-boot-autoconfiguration.html)
- [Create a Custom autoconfiguration with Spring Boot](https://www.baeldung.com/spring-boot-custom-autoconfiguration)
