# Expanding our first Controller

In this module, we’re going to take a closer look at some of the core Spring MVC annotations that are useful not only when building a REST API, but also when building a more traditional MVC application.

The relevant module for this lesson is: [expanding-our-first-controller-end](../code/learn-spring-m4/expanding-our-first-controller-end)

## Overview

Let’s start with the primary annotations that actually define our controllers:

-   _@Controller_
-   _@RestController_

We’ve already seen these core annotations. For example, when we were implementing our first, simple controller, we’ve used _@RestController._ Also, when we were implementing our MVC application, we’ve used _@Controller_.

Let's discuss the exact differences between them.

**@Controller doesn’t make any assumption about the style of application we’re building.** It doesn’t matter if we’re building a REST API or a traditional, MVC-style of application.

**@RestController, on the other hand, becomes handy when we’re building a REST API.** In this case, typically, we want to [marshall](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marshalling_(computer_science)) our responses, resources directly to the HTTP response body. So, we’ll need to use the _@ResponseBody_ annotation to do that.

The point is that putting that on each and every method gets repetitive. So, **the _@RestController_ annotation simply bundles _@ResponseBody_** so that we don’t have to manually add it each time.

Note that both _@Controller_ and _@RestController_ are stereotype annotations because they are a specialization of Spring’s _@Component_ stereotype annotation. These give more meaning to a controller class to clearly indicate whether it's an MVC or REST-style controller.

Another important aspect of handling the requests is the _@RequestMapping_ annotation. It helps us map our method with an HTTP verb, a request path and a few other details about the request.

**Spring MVC introduced a few simple shorthand annotations that we can use instead of the more open, low-level _@RequestMapping_**_:_

-   _@GetMapping_
-   _@PostMapping_
-   _@PutMapping_
-   _@DeleteMapping_

## @RequestMapping

Our goal here is to create a simple CRUD REST API for our domain.

Let’s open _ProjectController_:

```
@RestController
@RequestMapping(value = "/projects")
public class ProjectController {

}
```

Let’s have a closer look at _@RequestMapping_.

**It is defined not on an individual method, but at the base controller level.**

Generally speaking, the mappings logically belong on controller's methods. Why do we have it on the controller?

**That’s because we can actually combine multiple annotations at multiple levels.** This fact allows _Spring_ to merge them behind the scenes to form our final mapping, at the method level.

That’s hugely powerful. Simply put, when we define this at the controller level, it will apply to all methods defined in the controller as a baseline of common configuration which we can then refine at the method level.

### Example Methods: Get By Id

We can see how the above-mentioned idea of the mapping refinement works in the get by id method. **The base annotation sets the URL to _/projects_ and this method-level annotation sets it to _/{id}_._Spring_ will combine them into _/projects/{id}_.**

Also, notice this is using the _@GetMapping_ annotation which is basically a more refined version of _@RequestMapping,_ pre-selecting the GET HTTP verb for the mapping:

```
@GetMapping(value = "/{id}")
public Optional<Project> findOne(@PathVariable Long id) {
    return projectService.findById(id);
}
```

So, for example, we could write it like this:

```
@RequestMapping(method = RequestMethod.GET, value = "/{id}")
```

To be clear, the base annotation sets the URL to _/projects_ and this method-level annotation sets it to _/{id}_. Spring will combine them into _/projects/{id}_.

### Narrowing The Mapping

We can actually go beyond this by specifying the path and the HTTP verb in order to further narrow the mapping. Using other aspects of the request, we could, for example make sure this mapping only applies if a specific HTTP header is present on the request.

For example, let’s say we want this particular method to serve only [JSON](https://www.json.org/) and not [XML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XML)_._ We can easily do that:

```
headers = "accept=application/json"
```

We could also do the same thing using the more specific _produces_ attribute:

```
produces = "application/json"
```

Or, we could narrow the request based on a parameter:

```
params = "paramKey=paramValue"
```

## @RequestBody

If we have a look at our _ProjectController#create_ method, we'll notice that we’re using the _@RequestBody_ annotation here:

```
    @PostMapping
    @ResponseStatus(HttpStatus.CREATED)
    public Project create(@RequestBody(required = true) Project project) {
        return projectService.save(project);
    }
```

**By adding the _@RequestBody_ annotation, we get access to the body of the request and deserialize that** to a _Project_ object.

We could potentially indicate this is a valid scenario if we wanted to; the annotation allows adding a _required_ parameter which we can set to _false._

With this, the application would assign a _null_ value to the object instead of retrieving a 400 response code.

Since that is not the case here, we'll focus on adding the HTTP body. In order for the mapping to work correctly, **the JSON fields have to match the class attributes**. Naturally, this default behavior can be customized with annotations.

Therefore, just specifying the _name_ and _datecreated_ fields in our JSON should be enough:

```
$ curl -d '{ "name": "project name", "dateCreated": "2024-03-03" }' -X POST -H "Content-Type: application/json" http://localhost:8080/projects

{"id":4,"name":"project name","dateCreated":"2024-03-03","tasks":null}%      
```

A new entity will be created, and then retrieved with the generated _id_ and the corresponding _201 Created_ status code.

## @ResponseBody

This works similarly: **it indicates that the object we’re retrieving should be serialized as the raw response body**, since this is a REST API. **Even though we don’t have any _@ResponseBody_ annotation here, we’re still using it indirectly.**

As we mentioned previously, the _@RestController_ in a class serves as a shorthand for the _@Controller_ and the _@ResponseBody_ annotation. And this last annotation in a type level is inherited by all its methods.

That’s why our _create_ method retrieves a JSON object with the fields corresponding to the _Project_ attribute we saw above.

## @ResponseStatus

The _@ResponseStatus_ annotation can be used in 2 ways:

-   during Error handling
-   on Controller methods

When we don’t need dynamic error responses, the easiest solution is to mark the _Exception_ class with _@ResponseStatus_:

```
@ResponseStatus(code = HttpStatus.BAD_REQUEST)
class CustomException extends RuntimeException {}
```

If this _CustomException_ is thrown from any handler method, then HTTP error code 400 will be returned to the client.

When _@ResponseStatus_ is used on controller methods, **it overrides the default status code (200) returned to the client** only if the annotated method completes successfully without throwing an _Exception_.

## @PathVariable

**The** **_@PathVariable_** **annotation is generally used to extract different parts out of the request URL** which we can use to map URI template variables.

Let’s start by having a look at the _findOne_ method in our _ProjectController:_

```
@GetMapping(value = "/{id}")
public Optional<Project> findOne(@PathVariable Long id) {
    return projectService.findById(id);
}
```

Notice we’re using this _@PathVariable_ annotation to map the _id_ from the URL. This has already been defined in the URI pattern of the _@GetMapping_ annotation.

We could've also explicitly specified the name of the path parameter we wanted to bind our variable to, by using the main annotation argument:

```
@GetMapping(value = "/{id}")
public Optional<Project> findOne(@PathVariable("id") Long id) {
    return projectService.findById(id);
}
```

**As long as both the path parameter and the variable names match, we don’t need to do declare it explicitly.**


### _@PathVariable_ with Regular Expressions

We can map any number of variables or even use regular expressions to map the corresponding values from the URL path.
Let's see a quick example:

```
@GetMapping(value = "/{category}-{subcategoryId:\\d\\d}/{id}")
public Project findOne(@PathVariable Long id,
  @PathVariable String category,
  @PathVariable Integer subcategoryId) {
    // ...
}
```

Here we’re mapping a _category_ string and a two-digit _subcategoryId_ field separated with a hyphen ("_\-_") character. If we set up a breakpoint in this endpoint and send a request using the browser:

Finally, if some of the path variables are not required we can specify that with the _required_ annotation argument:

```
@GetMapping(value = "/{id}")
public Project findOne(@PathVariable(required = false) Long id) {
    ...
}
```

And instead of throwing an exception when the path variable is missing, the service will set a _null_ value to the variable.

## @RequestParam

**The** **_@RequestParam_** **annotation is used to map different request variables from the URL, such as query params.**

One common case when we’re implementing the API is to have query parameters that affect how the request will be processed. For instance, our business logic might have to define a strategy or filter its output based on the value of a parameter.

Let’s see a concrete example in our application. Right now, we have the 'find all' operation to retrieve all the Projects persisted in the database:

```
http://localhost:8080/projects
```


That’s OK, but not very granular. **Let’s make our controller not just retrieve all projects but to perform a search of particular projects that comply with certain constraints, in this case, based on the project’s _name_ field.**

For example:

```
http://localhost:8080/projects?name=Project 2
```

Should retrieve only one Project.

### Adapting Our Endpoint

Let’s add support for this feature in our API. **We'll start by renaming our method and adding an annotated parameter:**

```
@GetMapping("/find")
public Iterable<Project> findProjects(@RequestParam("name") String name) {
    return  projectService.findByName(name);
}
```

Naturally, the next step is to **add support to this new feature in the repository and in the service layer**.

```
public class ProjectServiceImpl implements IProjectService {
    ...
    public Iterable<Project> findByName(String name) {
        return projectRepository.findByNameContaining(name);
    }
    ...
}
```

```
public interface IProjectRepository extends CrudRepository<Project, Long> {
    Iterable<Project> findByNameContaining(String name);
}
```

If we now make the request in the browser, we'll see the service is retrieving just one entry as expected.


### The _required_ Attribute

**This annotation supports a _required_ attribute as well as a _defaultValue_ attribute.**

**The _required_ attribute is _true_ by default_._** This means that if we don’t provide a value for the request parameter the application will retrieve an error response, with a helpful message:

_Required String parameter 'name' is not present_

So, if we want to make this parameter optional we can either set a default value:

```
public Iterable<Project> findProjects(@RequestParam(name = "name", required = false) String name) {
  // ...
}
```

Or wrap the value using Java 8’s _Optional_ class:

```
public Iterable<Project> findProjects(@RequestParam(name = "name") Optional<String> name) {
  // ...
}
```

**Spring supports using the _Optional_ class in combination with annotations that support a _required_ attribute** like this one, the _@PathVariable_ or the _@RequestHeader_ annotations, for example and is equivalent to setting _required_ with a _false_ value.

Of course, we have to take into account that the parameter might have a null value and thus we have to handle that scenario as well.

### The _defaultValue_ Attribute

**Another possibility is to use an empty String as the default value which will also implicitly set the _required_ parameter as _false_ and will allow us to avoid null-checking the variable:**

```
public Iterable<Project> findProjects(@RequestParam(name = "name", defaultValue = "") String name) {
  // ...
}
```

Of course, we could potentially provide an actual value here if our API specification dictates that.

## Resources
* [Build your API with Spring](../books/build-your-API-with-spring.pdf)
