# Controllers and URLs - The @RequestParam annotation

In this lesson, we’ll analyze one more Spring MVC Controller annotation that comes into play when building a REST API, the _@RequestParam_ annotation.

The relevant module for this lesson is: [controller-urls-requestparam-end](../code/learn-spring-m5/controller-urls-requestparam-end)

## Uses of the _@RequestParam_ Annotation

**The** **_@RequestParam_** **annotation is used to map different request variables from the URL, such as query params.**

One common case when we’re implementing the API is to have query parameters that affect how the request will be processed.

For instance, our business logic might have to define a strategy or filter its output based on the value of a parameter.

Let’s see a concrete example in our application. Right now, we have the 'find all' operation to retrieve all the Projects persisted in the database:

```
http://localhost:8080/projects
```


That’s OK, but not very granular. **Let’s make our controller not just retrieve all projects but to perform a search of particular projects that comply with certain constraints, in this case, based on the project’s _name_ field.**

For example:

```
http://localhost:8080/projects?name=Project 2
```

Should retrieve only one Project.

## Adapting Our Endpoint

Let’s add support for this feature in our API. **We'll start by renaming our method and adding an annotated parameter:**

```
@GetMapping
public Collection<ProjectDto> findProjects(@RequestParam("name") String name) {
    Iterable<Project> projects = projectService.findByName(name);
    return StreamUtils.createStreamFromIterator(projects.iterator())
            .map(p -> mapper.projectToProjectDTO(p))
            .collect(Collectors.toList());
}
```

Naturally, the next step is to **add support to this new feature in the repository and in the service layer**.

```
public class ProjectServiceImpl implements IProjectService {
    ...
    public Iterable<Project> findByName(String name) {
        return projectRepository.findByNameContaining(name);
    }
    ...
}
```

```
public interface IProjectRepository extends CrudRepository<Project, Long> {
    Iterable<Project> findByNameContaining(String name);
}
```

If we now make the request in the browser, we'll see the service is retrieving just one entry as expected.


## The _required_ Attribute

**This annotation supports a _required_ attribute as well as a _defaultValue_ attribute.**

**The _required_ attribute is _true_ by default_._** This means that if we don’t provide a value for the request parameter the application will retrieve an error response, with a helpful message:

_Required String parameter 'name' is not present_

So, if we want to make this parameter optional we can either set a default value:

```
public Collection<ProjectDto> findProjects(@RequestParam(name = "name", required = false) String name) {
  // ...
}
```

Or wrap the value using Java 8’s _Optional_ class:

```
public Collection<ProjectDto> findProjects(@RequestParam(name = "name") Optional<String> name) {
  // ...
}
```

**Spring supports using the _Optional_ class in combination with annotations that support a _required_ attribute** like this one, the _@PathVariable_ or the _@RequestHeader_ annotations, for example and is equivalent to setting _required_ with a _false_ value.

Of course, we have to take into account that the parameter might have a null value and thus we have to handle that scenario as well.

## The _defaultValue_ Attribute

**Another possibility is to use an empty String as the default value which will also implicitly set the _required_ parameter as _false_ and will allow us to avoid null-checking the variable:**

```
public Collection<ProjectDto> findProjects(@RequestParam(name = "name", defaultValue = "") String name) {
  // ...
}
```

Of course, we could potentially provide an actual value here if our API specification dictates that.

## Resources
- [Spring Web Annotations](https://www.baeldung.com/spring-mvc-annotations)
- [Spring @RequestParam Annotation](https://www.baeldung.com/spring-request-param)
