# Testing with Boot

In this lesson, we’re going to focus on what testing support Spring Boot has, on top of the testing support in Spring, which we already discussed earlier.

The relevant module for this lesson is: [controller-basics-end](../code/learn-spring-m5/controller-basics-end) (see test/ folder)


## The Spring Boot Test Starter

**We can enable test support in Spring Boot by including the _spring-boot-starter-test_ dependency.**

This is a powerful dependency, and loads the core modules _spring-boot-test_ and _spring-boot-test-autoconfigure._

It also pulls in test modules and libraries such as _JUnit_, _AssertJ_, _Hamcrest_, _Mockito_ etc. to get us started quickly with writing tests.

We can open up our pom and see the main dependency we need: _spring-boot-starter-test,_ as we added this in our previous testing lesson. Also, we can check the dependencies it pulls in by opening the Eclipse dependency hierarchy.


## Testing the Application Context

The first thing you can do is write a simple sanity check test that will fail if the application context cannot start.

```
@SpringBootTest
class TestingWebApplicationTests {

	@Test
	void contextLoads() {
	}

}
```

The `@SpringBootTest` annotation tells Spring Boot to look for a main configuration class (one with `@SpringBootApplication`, for instance) and use that to start a Spring application context. You can run this test in your IDE or on the command line (by running `./mvnw test` or `./gradlew test`), and it should pass. To convince yourself that the context is creating your controller, you could add an assertion, as the following example shows:

```
@SpringBootTest
class SmokeTest {
    @Autowired
    private ProjectController controller;

    @Test
    void contextLoads() throws Exception {
        assertThat(controller).isNotNull();
    }
}
```

Spring interprets the `@Autowired` annotation, and the controller is injected before the test methods are run. We use [AssertJ](http://joel-costigliola.github.io/assertj/) (which provides `assertThat()` and other methods) to express the test assertions.

## Testing the Web Layer with _RestTemplate_

It is nice to have a sanity check, but you should also write some tests that assert the behavior of your application. To do that, you could start the application and listen for a connection (as it would do in production) and then send an HTTP request and assert the response. 

According to the official [documentation](https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/web/client/RestTemplate.html), `RestTemplate` is a synchronous client to perform HTTP requests. It is a higher-order API since it performs HTTP requests by using an HTTP client library like the JDK [HttpURLConnection](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/12/docs/api/java.base/java/net/HttpURLConnection.html), Apache HttpClient, and others. 
The HTTP client library takes care of all the low-level details of communication over HTTP while the `RestTemplate` adds the capability of transforming the request and response in [JSON](https://www.json.org/json-en.html) or [XML](https://www.w3.org/XML/) to Java objects.

The names of most of the methods are based on a naming convention:

-   the first part in the name indicates the HTTP method being invoked
-   the second part in the name indicates returned element.

* **getForEntity()**: executes a GET request and returns an object of ResponseEntity class that contains both the status code and the resource as an object.
* **getForObject()** : similar to getForEntity(), but returns the resource directly.
* **exchange()**: executes a specified HTTP method, such as GET, POST, PUT, etc, and returns a ResponseEntity containing both the HTTP status code and the resource as an object.
* **execute()** : similar to the exchange() method, but takes additional parameters: RequestCallback and ResultSetExtractor.
* **headForHeaders()**: executes a HEAD request and returns all HTTP headers for the specified URL.
* **optionsForAllow()**: executes an OPTIONS request and uses the Allow header to return the HTTP methods that are allowed under the specified URL.
* **delete()**: deletes the resources at the given URL using the HTTP DELETE method.
* **put()**: updates a resource for a given URL using the HTTP PUT method.
* **postForObject()** : creates a new resource using HTTP POST method and returns an entity.
* **postForLocation()**: creates a new resource using the HTTP POST method and returns the location of the newly created resource.

```
@SpringBootTest(webEnvironment = SpringBootTest.WebEnvironment.RANDOM_PORT)
public class HttpRequestTest {

    @LocalServerPort
    private int port;

    private final RestTemplate restTemplate = new RestTemplate();

    @Test
    public void givenProjectExists_whenGet_thenSuccess() {
        ResponseEntity<ProjectDto> response = restTemplate.getForEntity("http://localhost:" + port + "/projects/1", ProjectDto.class);
        assertThat(response.getStatusCode(), equalTo(HttpStatus.OK));
        assertThat(response.getBody().id(), equalTo(1L));
        assertThat(response.getBody().name(), equalTo("Project 1"));
    }

    @Test
    public void givenNewProject_whenCreated_thenSuccess() {
        ProjectDto newProject = new ProjectDto(17L, "Project 17", LocalDate.now());
        ResponseEntity<ProjectDto> response = restTemplate.postForEntity("http://localhost:" + port + "/projects", newProject, ProjectDto.class);
        assertSame(response.getStatusCode(), HttpStatus.CREATED);
    }
}
```

Note the use of `webEnvironment=RANDOM_PORT` to start the server with a random port (useful to avoid conflicts in test environments) and the injection of the port with `@LocalServerPort`. 

A core aspect of our integration tests is how they handle the web environment. They may be running with a full web environment, which is expensive, but if we need that, then it’s important we have it. They may also be mocking that, since it’s a lot quicker and is enough in a lot of tests. Finally, they may simply run without any web environment at all if the test isn’t really focused on that.

**We can control this run by changing the _webEnvironment_ attribute of the _@SpringBootTest_ annotation.**

The default value of this attribute is _MOCK_, which provides the default behaviour for our tests, i.e. loads a web Application context. Alternatively, we can set this to _NONE_ where we’re not really focused on the web layer.

Let’s modify our last test to disable to web layer and observe it failing!

```
@SpringBootTest(webEnvironment = SpringBootTest.WebEnvironment.NONE)
class HttpRequestTest {
    ...
}
```

Let’s briefly look at some advantages of the _RestTemplate_.

**_RestTemplate_ offers a higher-level abstraction over the underlying HTTP client libraries.** It can be configured to use different HTTP clients such as _OkHttp_, _Unirest_, _Apache_ _HttpComponents_, etc.

**Under the hood it performs content type detection, _URI_ encoding and HTTP message conversion to and from objects using _HttpMessageConverters._**

However, it’s important to note that in future versions of Spring, _RestTemplate_ will be deprecated in favor of the new [_WebClient_](https://docs.spring.io/spring/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/web/reactive/function/client/WebClient.html) which offers the same features and adds an efficient, non-blocking approach.


## Testing the Web Layer with _MockMvc_

Another useful approach is to not start the server at all but to test only the layer below that, where Spring handles the incoming HTTP request and hands it off to your controller. That way, almost all of the full stack is used, and your code will be called in exactly the same way as if it were processing a real HTTP request but without the cost of starting the server. To do that, use Spring’s `MockMvc` and ask for that to be injected for you by using the `@AutoConfigureMockMvc` annotation on the test case. In the following test, the full Spring application context is started but without the server.

```
@SpringBootTest
@AutoConfigureMockMvc
public class MockMvcTest {

    @Autowired
    private MockMvc mockMvc;

    @Test
    public void whenProjectExists_thenGetSuccess() throws Exception {
        mockMvc.perform(get("/projects/1"))
                .andExpect(status().isOk())
                .andExpect(jsonPath("$.name")
                        .value("Project 1"));
    }

    @Test
    public void whenProjectNotExists_thenGetFailure() throws Exception {
        mockMvc.perform(get("/projects/11"))
                .andExpect(status().isNotFound());
    }
}
```

## Testing the Web Layer (in isolation) with _MockMvc_

In the following example the server is not started (because we are using @WebMvcTest), but we also mock the service layer. In this way, we can test the web layer in isolation without the need of involving other components.

```
@WebMvcTest(controllers = ProjectController.class)
@ComponentScan(basePackages = "com.baeldung")
class MockMvcAltTest {

    @Autowired
    private MockMvc mockMvc;

    @MockBean
    private IProjectService service;

    @Test
    void whenProjectExists_thenGetSuccess() throws Exception {
        Project project = new Project();
        project.setId(3L);
        project.setName("Project 3");
        project.setDateCreated(LocalDate.of(2019, 6, 15));
        Optional<Project> optionalProject = Optional.of(project);

        when(service.findById(3L)).thenReturn(optionalProject);
        mockMvc.perform(get("/projects/3"))
                .andExpect(status().isOk())
                .andExpect(jsonPath("$.name")
                        .value("Project 3"));
    }
}
```

By setting the `controllers` parameter to `ProjectController.class` in the example above, we're telling Spring Boot to restrict the application context created for this test to the given controller bean and some framework beans needed for Spring Web MVC. All other beans we might need have to be included separately or mocked away with `@MockBean`.

If we leave away the `controllers` parameter, Spring Boot will include _all_ controllers in the application context. Thus, we need to include or mock away _all_ beans any controller depends on. This makes for a much more complex test setup with more dependencies, but saves runtime since all controller tests will re-use the same application context.

## Responsibilities of a Web Controller

| # | Responsibility | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 1. | **Listen to HTTP Requests** | The controller should respond to certain URLs, HTTP methods and content types. |
| 2. | **Deserialize Input** | The controller should parse the incoming HTTP request and create Java objects from variables in the URL, HTTP request parameters and the request body so that we can work with them in the code. |
| 3. | **Validate Input** | The controller is the first line of defense against bad input, so it’s a place where we can validate the input. |
| 4. | **Call the Business Logic** | Having parsed the input, the controller must transform the input into the model expected by the business logic and pass it on to the business logic. |
| 5. | **Serialize the Output** | The controller takes the output of the business logic and serializes it into an HTTP response. |
| 6. | **Translate Exceptions** | If an exception occurs somewhere on the way, the controller should translate it into a meaningful error message and HTTP status for the user. |

### Listen to HTTP Requests

Verifying that a controller listens to a certain HTTP request is pretty straightforward. We simply call the `perform()` method of `MockMvc` and provide the URL we want to test:

```
mockMvc.perform(MockMvcRequestBuilders
                .get("/projects/3")
                .contentType("application/json"))
        .andExpect(status().isOk())
        .andExpect(jsonPath("$.name").value("Project 3"));
```

Aside from verifying that the controller responds to a certain URL, this test also verifies the correct HTTP method (`GET` in this case) and the correct request content type. 

More options to match HTTP requests can be found in the Javadoc of [MockHttpServletRequestBuilder](https://docs.spring.io/spring/docs/current/javadoc-api/org/springframework/test/web/servlet/request/MockHttpServletRequestBuilder.html).

### Deserialize Input

To verify that the input is successfully deserialized into Java objects, we have to provide it in the test request. Input can be either the JSON content of the request body (`@RequestBody`), a variable within the URL path (`@PathVariable`), or an HTTP request parameter (`@RequestParam`):

```
@Test
void whenValidInputProject_thenReturns201() throws Exception {
    ProjectDto project = new ProjectDto(17L, "Project 17", LocalDate.of(2023, 1, 11));

    mockMvc.perform(MockMvcRequestBuilders
                    .post("/projects")
                    .contentType(MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON)
                    .content(objectMapper.writeValueAsString(project)))
            .andExpect(status().isCreated());
}
```

### Validate Input

If we want to test if the validation fails as expected, we need to add a test case in which we send an invalid UserResource JSON object to the controller. We then expect the controller to return HTTP status 400 (Bad Request):

Depending on how important the validation is for the application, we might add a test case like this for each invalid value that is possible. This can quickly add up to a lot of test cases, though, so you should talk to your team about how you want to handle validation tests in your project.

```
@Test
void whenInvalidInputProject_thenReturns400() throws Exception {
    ProjectDto project = new ProjectDto(17L, null, LocalDate.of(2023, 1, 11));

    mockMvc.perform(MockMvcRequestBuilders
                    .post("/projects")
                    .contentType(MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON)
                    .content(objectMapper.writeValueAsString(project)))
            .andExpect(status().isBadRequest());
}
```

### Call the Business Logic
Next, we want to verify that the business logic is called as expected. In our case, the business logic is provided by the IProjectService interface and expects a Project object as input:

To verify this, we can ask the IProjectService mock, which has been injected into the application context with the @MockBean annotation:

```
@Test
void whenValidInput_thenMapsToBusinessModel() throws Exception {
    ProjectDto project = new ProjectDto(17L, "Project 17", LocalDate.of(2023, 1, 11));

    mockMvc.perform(MockMvcRequestBuilders
                    .post("/projects")
                    .contentType(MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON)
                    .content(objectMapper.writeValueAsString(project)))
            .andExpect(status().isCreated());

    ArgumentCaptor<Project> projectCaptor = ArgumentCaptor.forClass(Project.class);
    verify(service).save(projectCaptor.capture());
    assertThat(projectCaptor.getValue().getName()).isEqualTo("Project 17");
    assertThat(projectCaptor.getValue().getDateCreated()).isEqualTo(LocalDate.of(2023, 1, 11));
}
```

After the call to the controller has been performed, we use an ArgumentCaptor to capture the Project object that was passed to the save() method and assert that it contains the expected values.

### Serialize the Output
After the business logic has been called, we expect the controller to map the result into a JSON string and include it in the HTTP response. In our case, we expect the HTTP response body to contain a valid Project object in JSON form:

```
@Test
void whenValidInput_thenReturnsUserResource() throws Exception {
    ProjectDto project = new ProjectDto(17L, "Project 17", LocalDate.of(2023, 1, 11));

    MvcResult mvcResult = mockMvc.perform(MockMvcRequestBuilders
                    .post("/projects")
                    .contentType(MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON)
                    .content(objectMapper.writeValueAsString(project)))
            .andReturn();

    String expectedResponseBody = objectMapper.writeValueAsString(project);
    String actualResponseBody = mvcResult.getRequest().getContentAsString();
    assertThat(actualResponseBody).isEqualToIgnoringWhitespace(expectedResponseBody);
}
```

To do assertions on the response body, we need to store the result of the HTTP interaction in a variable of type MvcResult using the andReturn() method.

We can then read the JSON string from the response body and compare it to the expected string using isEqualToIgnoringWhitespace(). 

### Translate Exceptions
Usually, if an exception occurs, the controller should return a certain HTTP status. 400, if something is wrong with the request, 500, if an exception bubbles up, and so on.

Spring takes care of most of these cases by default. However, if we have a custom exception handling, we want to test it. Let’s say we want to return a structured JSON error response with a field name and error message for each field that was invalid in the request. We’d create a `@ControllerAdvice` like this:
...

## Resources
- https://spring.io/guides/gs/testing-web/
- https://reflectoring.io/spring-boot-web-controller-test/
- https://reflectoring.io/spring-resttemplate/

